---
layout: article
title: Lessons learnt in deciding what to build
description: xxx
date: 22 May 2022
---

The one thing I realised when trying to validate ideas was how
experimental and iterative the whole process is. I doubt if anyone who launches
a successful product ever does so fully knowing what form it would finally take
or if their target users are ever going to grab it off their hands. I've read that
achieving product-market fit takes some time, even for the products that are
now well established and considered as household names (Instagram, for example,
started off as location-sharing app).

But reading is one thing but living through it is another. I have summarised below
my experience in building a usable product for the first time and the lessons
that it reinforced. I call it reinforced because, through reading/classes etc,
I was familiar with some version of these lessons but being in the thick of
things throws a whole new set of challenges.

_Lesson One: First, own the problem space_

Fresh from a coding bootcamp, I was raging to put my newfound skills to
practise. I plunged into action right away and settled for one of the first
product ideas that came to my head: an online assessment tool for school
teachers. Given the media coverage around the pandemic’s adverse effects on
school education at the time, I suspect that I might have subconsciously been
influenced by the world around me. That, and a soft spot for the education
sector in general. The goal was to improve my coding skills; why bother
thinking too much about _what_ I was going to build?

Idea in place, I rolled my sleeves and got down to the business of actually
building the web app. The struggles faced in this endeavour and the associated
learnings should be an entire article in its own right but suffice to say that
once I had emerged from many a rabbit hole that I had dug for myself, I had a
shiny new tool that (a) looked good (I had paid attention to basic UX/UI) and
(b) did what it was meant to do. My line of thinking about the product being a
non-issue would have just been fine if I had stopped it at that. Alas, not.
Chuffed by what I had managed to build on my own and swept away by my own
optimism, I reached out to a few schools and set up meetings where I could show
them my handiwork. For some reason, in that adrenaline-fuelled moment, the
image that I had in mind of a teacher was the one that I had myself encountered
at school: not very tech savvy nor open to embracing the tools of the future.

![Teachers' dashboard](/public/mojo-1.png)
*Figure 1: Teachers' Dashboard*

![Assignment setting](/public/mojo-2.png)
*Figure 2: Assignment setting*

![Students' Dasnboard](/public/mojo-3.png)
*Figure 3: Students' Dashboard*

It was an awakening of sorts when the first teacher, after patiently listening
to my product demo, asked me how it was different to Google Classrooms. I
remember mumbling something about the app being more intuitive and easier to
use. But, I knew in my heart of hearts, that it was not a compelling reason for
anyone to undertake a significant shift in their way of working. Another
conversation with another school went the same way. It took a moment of
discomfort (embarrassment, if you will) for it to sink in that schools had
adapted for the pandemic and that I was putting the cart before the horse. If I
were building a product that was actually going to be used by real people, I
should have been talking to those people first. I should have first immersed
myself in that space, identified what their problems were and whether the
problem was painful enough for them to resolve by dishing out money.

The conversations weren’t a total disaster though. I switched gears half-way
through the conversation and used the opportunity to find out more about the
issues teachers faced when setting homework. I learnt that creating assessment
material/questions was a time consuming task and that marking long-form answers
was another. These were problems not addressed by products such as Google
Classrooms or Microsoft Teams, and would probably never be. However, I knew
that there were many products in the market that addressed these issues in
various ways. Was there a gap in the market? Or was there something that
current players don’t cater fully to? My curiosity now stoked, I parked my app
to one side and set about trying to better understand the space.


_Lesson Two: Get creative when trying to understand and connect with your target
 audience_

I seemed to have had crude luck when sourcing teachers for my first two
conversations. It was either that or I was only able to get their attention by
referring to the product I had built. I quickly discovered that cold emails
where I asked for time for research purposes mostly went unanswered. Even the
attempts to source conversations through my personal networks were
unsuccessful: the teachers were either sceptical about confidentiality issues
or they just couldn't find the time to have a chat.

Searching for alternative means of connecting with the target user base, I
discovered that there were several Facebook groups that brought together
teachers from various backgrounds and interests: there was one for science
teachers, another for xxx and xxxx. I joined all the groups that I could find,
even related ones like those for parents who homeschool their children. I had
now had a means of engaging with the people that I had been struggling to
connect with before.

I spent a few weeks taking a back seat and quietly reading some of the posts
that cropped up in the group and the comments those posts garnered. The Science
group was particularly active; the posts ranged from asking where to find
questions to ideas for practical work to doubts about certain aspects of
science. Once I figured out the lay of the land, I posted a simple question to
the group: What were their biggest issues when it came to teaching science?
Reflecting on it now, it probably was a leading question but I wanted to spark
off a conversation and follow up individually to those who responded.

Judging by the number of responses generated within a few hours on a Sunday
morning, I seemed to have struck a chord. Replies ranged from the workload
associated with ongoing assessments to how broken science teaching at school
really was (“My degree is in biology, but I have to teach physics as well”; “We
just don’t have the time to make science relevant”; “I sometimes have to teach
maths as well because the maths teacher hasn’t covered the topic yet.”). Having
been a science student myself, I could relate to why providing an effective
science lesson was a challenge to most teachers.

_Lesson Three: Talking to users tells you whether you’d enjoy
 having them as customers as well_

The replies from science teachers allowed me to think a bit more about what they
were trying to achieve, or as a popular framework puts it, their ‘jobs to be
done’ when teaching science. I could garner enough empathy to see the other
side of the coin as well; the jobs that students were trying to get done when
trying to learn science. Merging them together gave me an inkling of an idea to
test. But which segment do I focus on? Should I build a product for
schools/teachers (i.e. B2B) or should it be something for students (B2C)? My
experience in trying to source teachers for interviews was eye-opening and made
me rethink who I wanted to target. If having a simple conversation with schools
and teachers was so arduous, how difficult would sales be when it comes to that
stage?

Again, to test out my hypothesis, I put together a landing page which
highlighted some product benefits (distilled from the Facebook interactions)
and shared the web link on the Facebook groups that I was part of (I had now
joined various education-focused groups for parents by this time). Within a
week, I had about fifty people who had signed up to receive a notification on
launch. Fifty who I could potentially have one-on-one conversations with. Just
for the record, an email blast to this group of people requesting time for a
quick chat yielded about 3 responses. Again, this gives an indication of the
type of customer that I would be dealing with if I were to go down this route.
